One day, Los Angeles Times columnist Steve Lopez was walking along the streets of downtown Los Angeles when he heard beautiful music. 
 And the source was a man, an African-American man, charming, rugged, homeless, playing a violin that only had two strings. 
 Nathaniel dropped out of Juilliard, he suffered a complete breakdown, and 30 years later he was living homeless on the streets of Skid Row in downtown Los Angeles. 
 I met Mr. Ayers in 2008, two years ago, at Walt Disney Concert Hall. 
 He had just heard a performance of Beethoven's First and Fourth symphonies, and came backstage and introduced himself. 
 And we got talking about music, and I got an email from Steve a few days later saying that Nathaniel was interested in a violin lesson with me. 
 And Nathaniel was in such a state of agitation when we started our first lesson at Walt Disney Concert Hall -- he had a kind of manic glint in his eyes, he was lost. 
 And he was talking about invisible demons and smoke, and how someone was poisoning him in his sleep. 
 So, I just started playing. 
 And I played the first movement of the Beethoven Violin Concerto. 
 And as I played, I understood that there was a profound change occurring in Nathaniel's eyes. 
 It was as if he was in the grip of some invisible pharmaceutical, a chemical reaction, for which my playing the music was its catalyst. 
 And Nathaniel's manic rage was transformed into understanding, a quiet curiosity and grace. 
 And I understood that he not only had an encyclopedic knowledge of music, but he related to this music at a personal level. 
 He spoke about it with the kind of passion and understanding that I share with my colleagues in the Los Angeles Philharmonic. 
 Music is medicine. Music changes us. 
 And for Nathaniel, music is sanity. 
 Because music allows him to take his thoughts and delusions and shape them through his imagination and his creativity, into reality. 
 And that is an escape from his tormented state. 
 And I understood that this was the very essence of art. 
 And the reality of that expression reaches all of us and moves us, inspires and unites us. 
 And for Nathaniel, music brought him back into a fold of friends. 
 The redemptive power of music brought him back into a family of musicians that understood him, that recognized his talents and respected him. 
 And I will always make music with Nathaniel, whether we're at Walt Disney Concert Hall or on Skid Row, because he reminds me why I became a musician. 
 Thank you. 
 Bruno Giussani: Thank you. Thanks. 
 Robert Gupta. 
 Robert Gupta: I'm going to play something that I shamelessly stole from cellists. 
 So, please forgive me. 
 So, I've known a lot of fish in my life. 
 I've loved only two. 
 That first one, it was more like a passionate affair. 
 It was a beautiful fish: flavorful, textured, meaty, a bestseller on the menu. 
 What a fish. 
 Even better, it was farm-raised to the supposed highest standards of sustainability. 
 So you could feel good about selling it. 
 I was in a relationship with this beauty for several months. 
 One day, the head of the company called and asked if I'd speak at an event about the farm's sustainability. 
 "Absolutely," I said. 
 Here was a company trying to solve what's become this unimaginable problem for us chefs: How do we keep fish on our menus? 
 For the past 50 years, we've been fishing the seas like we clear-cut forests. 
 It's hard to overstate the destruction. 
 Ninety percent of large fish, the ones we love -- the tunas, the halibuts, the salmons, swordfish -- they've collapsed. 
 There's almost nothing left. 
 So, for better or for worse, aquaculture, fish farming, is going to be a part of our future. 
 A lot of arguments against it: Fish farms pollute -- most of them do anyway -- and they're inefficient. Take tuna, a major drawback. 
 It's got a feed conversion ratio of 15 to one. 
 That means it takes fifteen pounds of wild fish to get you one pound of farm tuna. 
 Not very sustainable. 
 It doesn't taste very good either. 
 So here, finally, was a company trying to do it right. 
 I wanted to support them. 
 The day before the event, I called the head of P.R. for the company. 
 Let's call him Don. 
 "Don," I said, "just to get the facts straight, you guys are famous for farming so far out to sea, you don't pollute." 
 "That's right," he said. "We're so far out, the waste from our fish gets distributed, not concentrated." 
 And then he added, "We're basically a world unto ourselves. 
 That feed conversion ratio? 2.5 to one," he said. 
 "Best in the business." 
 2.5 to one, great. 
 "2.5 what? What are you feeding?" 
 "Sustainable proteins," he said. 
 "Great," I said. Got off the phone. 
 And that night, I was lying in bed, and I thought: What the hell is a sustainable protein? 
 So the next day, just before the event, I called Don. 
 I said, "Don, what are some examples of sustainable proteins?" 
 He said he didn't know. He would ask around. 
 Well, I got on the phone with a few people in the company; no one could give me a straight answer until finally, I got on the phone with the head biologist. 
 Let's call him Don too. 
 "Don," I said, "what are some examples of sustainable proteins?" 
 Well, he mentioned some algaes and some fish meals, and then he said chicken pellets. 
 I said, "Chicken pellets?" 
 He said, "Yeah, feathers, skin, bone meal, scraps, dried and processed into feed." 
 I said, "What percentage of your feed is chicken?" 
 Thinking, you know, two percent. 
 "Well, it's about 30 percent," he said. 
 I said, "Don, what's sustainable about feeding chicken to fish?" 
 There was a long pause on the line, and he said, "There's just too much chicken in the world." 
 I fell out of love with this fish. 
 No, not because I'm some self-righteous, goody-two shoes foodie. 
 I actually am. 
 No, I actually fell out of love with this fish because, I swear to God, after that conversation, the fish tasted like chicken. 
 This second fish, it's a different kind of love story. 
 It's the romantic kind, the kind where the more you get to know your fish, you love the fish. 
 I first ate it at a restaurant in southern Spain. 
 A journalist friend had been talking about this fish for a long time. 
 She kind of set us up. 
 It came to the table a bright, almost shimmering, white color. 
 The chef had overcooked it. 
 Like twice over. 
 Amazingly, it was still delicious. 
 Who can make a fish taste good after it's been overcooked? 
 I can't, but this guy can. 
 Let's call him Miguel -- actually his name is Miguel. 
 And no, he didn't cook the fish, and he's not a chef, at least in the way that you and I understand it. 
 He's a biologist at Veta La Palma. 
 It's a fish farm in the southwestern corner of Spain. 
 It's at the tip of the Guadalquivir river. 
 Until the 1980s, the farm was in the hands of the Argentinians. 
 They raised beef cattle on what was essentially wetlands. 
 They did it by draining the land. 
 They built this intricate series of canals, and they pushed water off the land and out into the river. 
 Well, they couldn't make it work, not economically. 
 And ecologically, it was a disaster. 
 It killed like 90 percent of the birds, which, for this place, is a lot of birds. 
 And so in 1982, a Spanish company with an environmental conscience purchased the land. 
 What did they do? 
 They reversed the flow of water. 
 They literally flipped the switch. 
 Instead of pushing water out, they used the channels to pull water back in. 
 They flooded the canals. 
 They created a 27,000-acre fish farm -- bass, mullet, shrimp, eel -- and in the process, Miguel and this company completely reversed the ecological destruction. 
 The farm's incredible. 
 I mean, you've never seen anything like this. 
 You stare out at a horizon that is a million miles away, and all you see are flooded canals and this thick, rich marshland. 
 I was there not long ago with Miguel. 
 He's an amazing guy, like three parts Charles Darwin and one part Crocodile Dundee. 
 Okay? There we are slogging through the wetlands, and I'm panting and sweating, got mud up to my knees, and Miguel's calmly conducting a biology lecture. 
 Here, he's pointing out a rare Black-shouldered Kite. 
 Now, he's mentioning the mineral needs of phytoplankton. 
 And here, here he sees a grouping pattern that reminds him of the Tanzanian Giraffe. 
 It turns out, Miguel spent the better part of his career in the Mikumi National Park in Africa. 
 I asked him how he became such an expert on fish. 
 He said, "Fish? I didn't know anything about fish. 
 I'm an expert in relationships." 
 And then he's off, launching into more talk about rare birds and algaes and strange aquatic plants. 
 And don't get me wrong, that was really fascinating, you know, the biotic community unplugged, kind of thing. 
 It's great, but I was in love. 
 And my head was swooning over that overcooked piece of delicious fish I had the night before. 
 So I interrupted him. I said, "Miguel, what makes your fish taste so good?" 
 He pointed at the algae. 
 "I know, dude, the algae, the phytoplankton, the relationships: It's amazing. 
 But what are your fish eating? 
 What's the feed conversion ratio?" 
 Well, he goes on to tell me it's such a rich system that the fish are eating what they'd be eating in the wild. 
 The plant biomass, the phytoplankton, the zooplankton, it's what feeds the fish. 
 The system is so healthy, it's totally self-renewing. 
 There is no feed. 
 Ever heard of a farm that doesn't feed its animals? 
 At that moment, it was as if a film director called for a set change. 
 And we rounded the corner and saw the most amazing sight: thousands and thousands of pink flamingos, a literal pink carpet for as far as you could see. 
 "That's success," he said. 
 "Look at their bellies, pink. 
 They're feasting." 
 Feasting? I was totally confused. 
 I said, "Miguel, aren't they feasting on your fish?" 
 "Yes," he said. 
 "We lose 20 percent of our fish and fish eggs to birds. 
 Well, last year, this property had 600,000 birds on it, more than 250 different species. 
 It's become, today, the largest and one of the most important private bird sanctuaries in all of Europe." 
 I said, "Miguel, isn't a thriving bird population like the last thing you want on a fish farm?" 
 He shook his head, no. 
 He said, "We farm extensively, not intensively. 
 This is an ecological network. 
 The flamingos eat the shrimp. 
 The shrimp eat the phytoplankton. 
 So the pinker the belly, the better the system." 
 Okay, so let's review: a farm that doesn't feed its animals, and a farm that measures its success on the health of its predators. 
 A fish farm, but also a bird sanctuary. 
 Oh, and by the way, those flamingos, they shouldn't even be there in the first place. 
 They brood in a town 150 miles away, where the soil conditions are better for building nests. 
 Every morning, they fly 150 miles into the farm. 
 And every evening, they fly 150 miles back. 
 They do that because they're able to follow the broken white line of highway A92. 
 No kidding. 
 I was imagining a "March of the Penguins" thing, so I looked at Miguel. 
 I said, "Miguel, do they fly 150 miles to the farm, and then do they fly 150 miles back at night? 
 Do they do that for the children?" 
 He looked at me like I had just quoted a Whitney Houston song. 
 He said, "No; they do it because the food's better." 
 I didn't mention the skin of my beloved fish, which was delicious -- and I don't like fish skin; I don't like it seared, I don't like it crispy. 
 It's that acrid, tar-like flavor. 
 I almost never cook with it. 
 Yet, when I tasted it at that restaurant in southern Spain, it tasted not at all like fish skin. 
 It tasted sweet and clean, like you were taking a bite of the ocean. 
 I mentioned that to Miguel, and he nodded. 
 He said, "The skin acts like a sponge. 
 It's the last defense before anything enters the body. 
 It evolved to soak up impurities." 
 And then he added, "But our water has no impurities." 
 OK. A farm that doesn't feed its fish, a farm that measures its success by the success of its predators. 
 It's a river that carries with it all the things that rivers tend to carry these days: chemical contaminants, pesticide runoff. 
 And when it works its way through the system and leaves, the water is cleaner than when it entered. 
 The system is so healthy, it purifies the water. 
 Because when that water leaves, it dumps out into the Atlantic. 
 A drop in the ocean, I know, but I'll take it, and so should you, because this love story, however romantic, is also instructive. 
 You might say it's a recipe for the future of good food, whether we're talking about bass or beef cattle. 
 What we need now is a radically new conception of agriculture, one in which the food actually tastes good. 
 But for a lot people, that's a bit too radical. 
 We're not realists, us foodies; we're lovers. 
 We love farmers' markets, we love small family farms, we talk about local food, we eat organic. 
 And when you suggest these are the things that will ensure the future of good food, someone, somewhere stands up and says, "Hey guy, I love pink flamingos, but how are you going to feed the world?" 
 How are you going to feed the world? 
 Can I be honest? 
 I don't love that question. 
 No, not because we already produce enough calories to more than feed the world. 
 One billion people will go hungry today. 
 One billion -- that's more than ever before -- because of gross inequalities in distribution, not tonnage. 
 Now, I don't love this question because it's determined the logic of our food system for the last 50 years. 
 That's been the motivation, it's been the justification: it's been the business plan of American agriculture. 
 We should call it what it is: a business in liquidation, a business that's quickly eroding ecological capital that makes that very production possible. 
 That's not a business, and it isn't agriculture. 
 Our breadbasket is threatened today, not because of diminishing supply, but because of diminishing resources. 
 Want to feed the world? 
 Let's start by asking: How are we going to feed ourselves? 
 Or better: How can we create conditions that enable every community to feed itself? 
 To do that, don't look at the agribusiness model for the future. 
 It's really old, and it's tired. 
 It's high on capital, chemistry and machines, and it's never produced anything really good to eat. 
 Instead, let's look to the ecological model. 
 That's the one that relies on two billion years of on-the-job experience. 
 Look to Miguel, farmers like Miguel. 
 Because they're the ones that are experts in flavor, too. 
 And if I'm going to be really honest, they're a better chef than I'll ever be. 
 You know, I'm okay with that, because if that's the future of good food, it's going to be delicious. 
 Thank you. 
 So what we're looking at right here is a typical mortality chart organized by age. 
 This tool that I'm using here is a little experiment. 
 It's called Pivot, and with Pivot what I can do is I can choose to filter in one particular cause of deaths -- say, accidents. 
 And, right away, I see there's a different pattern that emerges. 
 This is because, in the mid-area here, people are at their most active, and over here they're at their most frail. 
 We can step back out again and then reorganize the data by cause of death, seeing that circulatory diseases and cancer are the usual suspects, but not for everyone. 
 And if you drill into that, it's especially the case for men. 
 So you get the idea that viewing information, viewing data in this way, is a lot like swimming in a living information info-graphic. 
 And if we can do this for raw data, why not do it for content as well? 
 So what we have right here is the cover of every single Sports Illustrated ever produced. 
 It's all here; it's all on the web. 
 You can go back to your rooms and try this after my talk. 
 With Pivot, you can drill into a decade. 
 You can drill into a particular year. 
 You can jump right into a specific issue. 
 So I'm looking at this; I see the athletes that have appeared in this issue, the sports. 
 I'm a Lance Armstrong fan, so I'll go ahead and I'll click on that, which reveals, for me, all the issues in which Lance Armstrong's been a part of. 
 Now, if I want to just kind of take a peek at these, I might think, "Well, what about taking a look at all of cycling?" 
 So I can step back, and expand on that. 
 And I see Greg LeMond now. 
 You're doing something that's actually a little bit different. 
 It's in between, and we think it changes the way information can be used. 
 So I want to extrapolate on this idea a bit with something that's a little bit crazy. 
 What we're done here is we've taken every single Wikipedia page and we reduced it down to a little summary. 
 So the summary consists of just a little synopsis and an icon to indicate the topical area that it comes from. 
 I'm only showing the top 500 most popular Wikipedia pages right here. 
 But even in this limited view, we can do a lot of things. 
 Right away, we get a sense of what are the topical domains that are most popular on Wikipedia. 
 I'm going to go ahead and select government. 
 Now, having selected government, I can now see that the Wikipedia categories that most frequently correspond to that are Time magazine People of the Year. 
 So this is really important because this is an insight that was not contained within any one Wikipedia page. 
 It's only possible to see that insight when you step back and look at all of them. 
 Looking at one of these particular summaries, I can then drill into the concept of Time magazine Person of the Year, bringing up all of them. 
 And interestingly enough, Bono is also a TED Prize winner. 
 So we can go, jump, and take a look at all the TED Prize winners. 
 And so I want to show you one other thing that may catch you a little bit by surprise. 
 I'm just showing the New York Times website here. 
 So I can step back, pop right back into a specific section. 
 Now the reason why this is important is because, by virtue of just viewing web pages in this way, I can look at my entire browsing history in the exact same way. 
 So I can drill into what I've done over specific time frames. 
 Here, in fact, is the state of all the demo that I just gave. 
 And I can sort of replay some stuff that I was looking at earlier today. 
 And from these, I can drill into the web page and just launch them again. 
 It's one metaphor repurposed multiple times, and in each case it makes the whole greater than the sum of the parts with the data. 
 So right now, in this world, we think about data as being this curse. 
 We talk about the curse of information overload. 
 We talk about drowning in data. 
 If we can do that, then instead of being trapped in data, we might actually extract information. 
 And, instead of dealing just with information, we can tease out knowledge. 
 And if we get the knowledge, then maybe even there's wisdom to be found. 
 So with that, I thank you. 
 I grew up on a steady diet of science fiction. 
 In high school, I took a bus to school an hour each way every day. 
 And I was always absorbed in a book, science fiction book, which took my mind to other worlds, and satisfied, in a narrative form, this insatiable sense of curiosity that I had. 
 You know, I was a real science geek. 
 But it was all about trying to understand the world, understand the limits of possibility. 
 And my love of science fiction actually seemed mirrored in the world around me, because what was happening, this was in the late '60s, we were going to the moon, we were exploring the deep oceans. 
 Jacques Cousteau was coming into our living rooms with his amazing specials that showed us animals and places and a wondrous world that we could never really have previously imagined. 
 So, that seemed to resonate with the whole science fiction part of it. 
 And I was an artist. 
 I could draw. I could paint. 
 You know, we all did, as kids having to read a book, and through the author's description, put something on the movie screen in our heads. 
 And so, my response to this was to paint, to draw alien creatures, alien worlds, robots, spaceships, all that stuff. 
 I was endlessly getting busted in math class doodling behind the textbook. 
 That was -- the creativity had to find its outlet somehow. 
 And an interesting thing happened: The Jacques Cousteau shows actually got me very excited about the fact that there was an alien world right here on Earth. 
 I might not really go to an alien world on a spaceship someday -- that seemed pretty darn unlikely. 
 But that was a world I could really go to, right here on Earth, that was as rich and exotic as anything that I had imagined from reading these books. 
 So, I decided I was going to become a scuba diver at the age of 15. 
 And the only problem with that was that I lived in a little village in Canada, 600 miles from the nearest ocean. 
 But I didn't let that daunt me. 
 I pestered my father until he finally found a scuba class in Buffalo, New York, right across the border from where we live. 
 And I actually got certified in a pool at a YMCA in the dead of winter in Buffalo, New York. 
 And I didn't see the ocean, a real ocean, for another two years, until we moved to California. 
 Since then, in the intervening 40 years, I've spent about 3,000 hours underwater, and 500 hours of that was in submersibles. 
 And I've learned that that deep-ocean environment, and even the shallow oceans, are so rich with amazing life that really is beyond our imagination. 
 Nature's imagination is so boundless compared to our own meager human imagination. 
 I still, to this day, stand in absolute awe of what I see when I make these dives. 
 And my love affair with the ocean is ongoing, and just as strong as it ever was. 
 But when I chose a career as an adult, it was filmmaking. 
 And that seemed to be the best way to reconcile this urge I had to tell stories with my urges to create images. 
 And I was, as a kid, constantly drawing comic books, and so on. 
 So, filmmaking was the way to put pictures and stories together, and that made sense. 
 And of course the stories that I chose to tell were science fiction stories: "Terminator," "Aliens" and "The Abyss." 
 And with "The Abyss," I was putting together my love of underwater and diving with filmmaking. 
 So, you know, merging the two passions. 
 And this resulted in the first soft-surface character, CG animation that was ever in a movie. 
 You know, it's Arthur Clarke's law that any sufficiently advanced technology is indistinguishable from magic. 
 They were seeing something magical. 
 And so that got me very excited. 
 And I thought, "Wow, this is something that needs to be embraced into the cinematic art." 
 So, with "Terminator 2," which was my next film, we took that much farther. 
 Working with ILM, we created the liquid metal dude in that film. The success hung in the balance on whether that effect would work. 
 And it did, and we created magic again, and we had the same result with an audience -- although we did make a little more money on that one. 
 So, drawing a line through those two dots of experience came to, "This is going to be a whole new world," this was a whole new world of creativity for film artists. 
 And the concept of the company was that we would leapfrog past the analog processes of optical printers and so on, and we would go right to digital production. 
 And we actually did that and it gave us a competitive advantage for a while. 
 But we found ourselves lagging in the mid '90s in the creature and character design stuff that we had actually founded the company to do. 
 And the envelope pushed back, and I was told by the folks at my company that we weren't going to be able to do this for a while. 
 So, I shelved it, and I made this other movie about a big ship that sinks. 
 You know, I went and pitched it to the studio as "'Romeo and Juliet' on a ship: "It's going to be this epic romance, passionate film." 
 Secretly, what I wanted to do was I wanted to dive to the real wreck of "Titanic." 
 And that's why I made the movie. 
 And that's the truth. Now, the studio didn't know that. 
 But I convinced them. I said, "We're going to dive to the wreck. We're going to film it for real. 
 We'll be using it in the opening of the film. 
 It will be really important. It will be a great marketing hook." 
 And I talked them into funding an expedition. 
 Sounds crazy. But this goes back to that theme about your imagination creating a reality. 
 Because we actually created a reality where six months later, I find myself in a Russian submersible two and a half miles down in the north Atlantic, looking at the real Titanic through a view port. 
 Not a movie, not HD -- for real. 
 Now, that blew my mind. 
 And it took a lot of preparation, we had to build cameras and lights and all kinds of things. 
 But, it struck me how much this dive, these deep dives, was like a space mission. 
 You know, where it was highly technical, and it required enormous planning. 
 You get in this capsule, you go down to this dark hostile environment where there is no hope of rescue if you can't get back by yourself. 
 And I thought like, "Wow. I'm like, living in a science fiction movie. 
 This is really cool." 
 And so, I really got bitten by the bug of deep-ocean exploration. 
 Of course, the curiosity, the science component of it -- it was everything. It was adventure, it was curiosity, it was imagination. 
 And it was an experience that Hollywood couldn't give me. 
 Because, you know, I could imagine a creature and we could create a visual effect for it. But I couldn't imagine what I was seeing out that window. 
 So, I was completely smitten by this, and had to do more. 
 And so, I actually made a kind of curious decision. 
 After the success of "Titanic," I said, "OK, I'm going to park my day job as a Hollywood movie maker, and I'm going to go be a full-time explorer for a while." 
 And so, we started planning these expeditions. 
 And we wound up going to the Bismark, and exploring it with robotic vehicles. 
 We went back to the Titanic wreck. 
 We took little bots that we had created that spooled a fiber optic. 
 And the idea was to go in and do an interior survey of that ship, which had never been done. 
 Nobody had ever looked inside the wreck. They didn't have the means to do it, so we created technology to do it. 
 So, you know, here I am now, on the deck of Titanic, sitting in a submersible, and looking out at planks that look much like this, where I knew that the band had played. 
 And I'm flying a little robotic vehicle through the corridor of the ship. 
 When I say, "I'm operating it," but my mind is in the vehicle. 
 I felt like I was physically present inside the shipwreck of Titanic. 
 And the set was based as an exact replica on the blueprints of the ship. 
 So, it was this absolutely remarkable experience. 
 And it really made me realize that the telepresence experience -- that you actually can have these robotic avatars, then your consciousness is injected into the vehicle, into this other form of existence. 
 It was really, really quite profound. 
 They live in an environment of chemosynthesis. 
 They don't survive on sunlight-based system the way we do. 
 And so, you're seeing animals that are living next to a 500-degree-Centigrade water plumes. 
 You think they can't possibly exist. 
 At the same time I was getting very interested in space science as well -- again, it's the science fiction influence, as a kid. 
 And this was fascinating. 
 But what I wound up doing was bringing space scientists with us into the deep. 
 So, here we were making documentary films, but actually doing science, and actually doing space science. 
 I'd completely closed the loop between being the science fiction fan, you know, as a kid, and doing this stuff for real. 
 And you know, along the way in this journey of discovery, I learned a lot. 
 I learned a lot about science. But I also learned a lot about leadership. 
 Now you think director has got to be a leader, leader of, captain of the ship, and all that sort of thing. 
 I didn't really learn about leadership until I did these expeditions. 
 Because I had to, at a certain point, say, "What am I doing out here? 
 Why am I doing this? What do I get out of it?" 
 We don't make money at these damn shows. 
 We barely break even. There is no fame in it. 
 People sort of think I went away between "Titanic" and "Avatar" and was buffing my nails someplace, sitting at the beach. 
 Made all these films, made all these documentary films for a very limited audience. 
 No fame, no glory, no money. What are you doing? 
 Because we would do these things with 10, 12 people, working for years at a time, sometimes at sea for two, three months at a time. 
 And in that bond, you realize that the most important thing is the respect that you have for them and that they have for you, that you've done a task that you can't explain to someone else. 
 Creates a bond, creates a bond of respect. 
 And it really changed the dynamic. 
 So, here I was again with a small team, in uncharted territory, doing "Avatar," coming up with new technology that didn't exist before. 
 Tremendously exciting. 
 Tremendously challenging. 
 And we became a family, over a four-and-half year period. 
 And it completely changed how I do movies. 
 So, people have commented on how, "Well, you know, you brought back the ocean organisms and put them on the planet of Pandora." 
 To me, it was more of a fundamental way of doing business, the process itself, that changed as a result of that. 
 So, what can we synthesize out of all this? 
 You know, what are the lessons learned? 
 Well, I think number one is curiosity. 
 It's the most powerful thing you own. 
 Imagination is a force that can actually manifest a reality. 
 And the respect of your team is more important than all the laurels in the world. 
 I have young filmmakers come up to me and say, "Give me some advice for doing this." 
 And I say, "Don't put limitations on yourself. 
 Other people will do that for you -- don't do it to yourself, don't bet against yourself, and take risks." 
 NASA has this phrase that they like: "Failure is not an option." 
 But failure has to be an option in art and in exploration, because it's a leap of faith. 
 And no important endeavor that required innovation was done without risk. 
 You have to be willing to take those risks. 
 So, that's the thought I would leave you with, is that in whatever you're doing, failure is an option, but fear is not. Thank you. 
 I'm going to talk today about energy and climate. 
 But energy and climate are extremely important to these people -- in fact, more important than to anyone else on the planet. 
 And that leads to starvation, it leads to uncertainty, it leads to unrest. 
 So, the climate changes will be terrible for them. 
 Also, the price of energy is very important to them. 
 In fact, if you could pick just one thing to lower the price of, to reduce poverty, by far you would pick energy. 
 Now, the price of energy has come down over time. 
 Really advanced civilization is based on advances in energy. 
 And so, we're in a wonderful situation with electricity in the rich world. 
 But, as we make it cheaper -- and let's go for making it twice as cheap -- we need to meet a new constraint, and that constraint has to do with CO2. 
 CO2 is warming the planet, and the equation on CO2 is actually a very straightforward one. 
 And there's certainly uncertainty about how bad those effects will be, but they will be extremely bad. 
 I asked the top scientists on this several times: Do we really have to get down to near zero? 
 Can't we just cut it in half or a quarter? 
 And the answer is that until we get near to zero, the temperature will continue to rise. 
 And so that's a big challenge. 
 It's very different than saying "We're a twelve-foot-high truck trying to get under a ten-foot bridge, and we can just sort of squeeze under." 
 This is something that has to get to zero. 
 Now, we put out a lot of carbon dioxide every year, over 26 billion tons. 
 For each American, it's about 20 tons; for people in poor countries, it's less than one ton. 
 It's an average of about five tons for everyone on the planet. 
 And, somehow, we have to make changes that will bring that down to zero. 
 It's been constantly going up. 
 It's only various economic changes that have even flattened it at all, so we have to go from rapidly rising to falling, and falling all the way to zero. 
 So, let's look at each one of these and see how we can get this down to zero. 
 Probably, one of these numbers is going to have to get pretty near to zero. 
 Now that's back from high school algebra, but let's take a look. 
 First, we've got population. 
 The world today has 6.8 billion people. 
 That's headed up to about nine billion. 
 The second factor is the services we use. 
 This encompasses everything: the food we eat, clothing, TV, heating. 
 These are very good things: getting rid of poverty means providing these services to almost everyone on the planet. 
 And it's a great thing for this number to go up. 
 Here we have a very basic service: Do you have lighting in your house to be able to read your homework? 
 And, in fact, these kids don't, so they're going out and reading their school work under the street lamps. 
 Now, efficiency, E, the energy for each service, here finally we have some good news. 
 We have something that's not going up. 
 Some individual services even bring it down by 90 percent. 
 There are other services like how we make fertilizer, or how we do air transport, where the rooms for improvement are far, far less. 
 And so, overall here, if we're optimistic, we may get a reduction of a factor of three to even, perhaps, a factor of six. 
 But for these first three factors now, we've gone from 26 billion to, at best, maybe 13 billion tons, and that just won't cut it. 
 So let's look at this fourth factor -- this is going to be a key one -- and this is the amount of CO2 put out per each unit of energy. 
 And so the question is: Can you actually get that to zero? 
 If you burn coal, no. 
 If you burn natural gas, no. 
 Almost every way we make electricity today, except for the emerging renewables and nuclear, puts out CO2. 
 And so, what we're going to have to do at a global scale, is create a new system. 
 And so, we need energy miracles. 
 Now, when I use the term "miracle," I don't mean something that's impossible. 
 The microprocessor is a miracle. The personal computer is a miracle. 
 The Internet and its services are a miracle. 
 So, the people here have participated in the creation of many miracles. 
 Usually, we don't have a deadline, where you have to get the miracle by a certain date. 
 Usually, you just kind of stand by, and some come along, some don't. 
 This is a case where we actually have to drive at full speed and get a miracle in a pretty tight timeline. 
 Now, I thought, "How could I really capture this? 
 Is there some kind of natural illustration, some demonstration that would grab people's imagination here?" 
 I thought back to a year ago when I brought mosquitos, and somehow people enjoyed that. 
 It really got them involved in the idea of, you know, there are people who live with mosquitos. 
 So, with energy, all I could come up with is this. 
 I decided that releasing fireflies would be my contribution to the environment here this year. 
 So here we have some natural fireflies. 
 I'm told they don't bite; in fact, they might not even leave that jar. 
 Now, there's all sorts of gimmicky solutions like that one, but they don't really add up to much. 
 I've left out tide, geothermal, fusion, biofuels. 
 Let's look first at the burning fossil fuels, either burning coal or burning natural gas. 
 Who's going to be sure? 
 Who's going to guarantee something that is literally billions of times larger than any type of waste you think of in terms of nuclear or other things? 
 This is a lot of volume. 
 So that's a tough one. 
 Next would be nuclear. 
 And then what do you do with the waste? 
 And, although it's not very large, there are a lot of concerns about that. 
 People need to feel good about it. 
 So three very tough problems that might be solvable, and so, should be worked on. 
 The last three of the five, I've grouped together. 
 These are what people often refer to as the renewable sources. 
 And they actually -- although it's great they don't require fuel -- they have some disadvantages. 
 One is that the density of energy gathered in these technologies is dramatically less than a power plant. 
 This is energy farming, so you're talking about many square miles, thousands of time more area than you think of as a normal energy plant. 
 Also, these are intermittent sources. 
 The sun doesn't shine all day, it doesn't shine every day, and, likewise, the wind doesn't blow all the time. 
 And so, if you depend on these sources, you have to have some way of getting the energy during those time periods that it's not available. 
 And, finally, this storage problem. 
 And so, in fact, we need a big breakthrough here, something that's going to be a factor of 100 better than the approaches we have now. 
 It's not impossible, but it's not a very easy thing. 
 Now, this shows up when you try to get the intermittent source to be above, say, 20 to 30 percent of what you're using. 
 If you're counting on it for 100 percent, you need an incredible miracle battery. 
 Now, how we're going to go forward on this -- what's the right approach? 
 Is it a Manhattan Project? What's the thing that can get us there? 
 Well, we need lots of companies working on this, hundreds. 
 In each of these five paths, we need at least a hundred people. 
 And a lot of them, you'll look at and say, "They're crazy." That's good. 
 And, I think, here in the TED group, we have many people who are already pursuing this. 
 Bill Gross has several companies, including one called eSolar that has some great solar thermal technologies. 
 Vinod Khosla's investing in dozens of companies that are doing great things and have interesting possibilities, and I'm trying to help back that. 
 Nathan Myhrvold and I actually are backing a company that, perhaps surprisingly, is actually taking the nuclear approach. 
 There are some innovations in nuclear: modular, liquid. 
 And innovation really stopped in this industry quite some ago, so the idea that there's some good ideas laying around is not all that surprising. 
