David Gallo: This is Bill Lange. I'm Dave Gallo.
And we're going to tell you some stories from the sea here in video.
We've got some of the most incredible video of Titanic that's ever been seen, and we're not going to show you any of it.
And the problem, I think, is that we take the ocean for granted.
When you think about it, the oceans are 75 percent of the planet.
Most of the planet is ocean water.
The average depth is about two miles.
And in the oceans, there are the longest mountain ranges on the planet.
Most of the animals are in the oceans.
Most of the earthquakes and volcanoes are in the sea, at the bottom of the sea.
The biodiversity and the biodensity in the ocean is higher, in places, than it is in the rainforests.
It's mostly unexplored, and yet there are beautiful sights like this that captivate us and make us become familiar with it.
But when you're standing at the beach, I want you to think that you're standing at the edge of a very unfamiliar world.
We have to have a very special technology to get into that unfamiliar world.
We use the submarine Alvin and we use cameras, and the cameras are something that Bill Lange has developed with the help of Sony.
Here's a jelly.
It's one of my favorites, because it's got all sorts of working parts.
This turns out to be the longest creature in the oceans.
It gets up to about 150 feet long.
But see all those different working things?
I love that kind of stuff.
It's got these fishing lures on the bottom. They're going up and down.
It's got tentacles dangling, swirling around like that.
It's a colonial animal.
These are all individual animals banding together to make this one creature.
And it's got these jet thrusters up in front that it'll use in a moment, and a little light.
Most of the biomass in the ocean is made out of creatures like this.
Here's the X-wing death jelly.
The bioluminescence -- they use the lights for attracting mates and attracting prey and communicating.
We couldn't begin to show you our archival stuff from the jellies.
They come in all different sizes and shapes.
They're very little understood.
DG: This is one of them, another one of our favorites, because it's a little octopod.
You can actually see through his head.
And here he is, flapping with his ears and very gracefully going up.
We see those at all depths and even at the greatest depths.
They go from a couple of inches to a couple of feet.
They come right up to the submarine -- they'll put their eyes right up to the window and peek inside the sub.
This is really a world within a world, and we're going to show you two.
In this case, we're passing down through the mid-ocean and we see creatures like this.
This is kind of like an undersea rooster.
This guy, that looks incredibly formal, in a way.
And then one of my favorites. What a face!
This is basically scientific data that you're looking at.
It's footage that we've collected for scientific purposes.
They don't catch them in a net.
They're actually looking at them down in that world.
We're going to look at the mid-ocean ridge, a 40,000-mile long mountain range.
The average depth at the top of it is about a mile and a half.
We make maps of these mountain ranges with sound, with sonar, and this is one of those mountain ranges.
We're coming around a cliff here on the right.
The height of these mountains on either side of this valley is greater than the Alps in most cases.
And there's tens of thousands of those mountains out there that haven't been mapped yet.
This is a volcanic ridge.
We're getting down further and further in scale.
And eventually, we can come up with something like this.
This is an icon of our robot, Jason, it's called.
Because we see it in bits and pieces right now.
Here's where Bill's cameras really do shine.
This is what's called a hydrothermal vent.
Gets up to 600, 700 degrees F, somewhere in that range.
And we knew it was volcanic back in the '60s, '70s.
We weren't really aware that it would be so rich with sulfides, hydrogen sulfides.
We didn't have any idea about these things, which we call chimneys.
This is one of these hydrothermal vents.
Six hundred degree F water coming out of the Earth.
On either side of us are mountain ranges that are higher than the Alps, so the setting here is very dramatic.
BL: The white material is a type of bacteria that thrives at 180 degrees C.
And we started to wonder for a long time, how did it all get down there?
What we find out now is that it's probably coming from inside the Earth.
The pressure here is 4,000 pounds per square inch.
A mile and a half from the surface to two miles to three miles -- no sun has ever gotten down here.
All the energy to support these life forms is coming from inside the Earth -- so, chemosynthesis.
And you can see how dense the population is.
These are called tube worms.
BL: These worms have no digestive system. They have no mouth.
But they have two types of gill structures.
DG: You can see, here's a crab that lives down there.
He's managed to grab a tip of these worms.
Now, they normally retract as soon as a crab touches them.
Oh! Good going.
So, as soon as a crab touches them, they retract down into their shells, just like your fingernails.
There's a whole story being played out here that we're just now beginning to have some idea of because of this new camera technology.
BL: These worms live in a real temperature extreme.
That's how they like to live.
DG: This is a female of this kind of worm.
And here's a male.
Everything you see is played out in the pitch black of the deep sea.
There are never any lights there, except the lights that we bring.
Here they go.
On one of the last dive series, we counted 200 species in these areas -- 198 were new, new species.
And they disintegrate on the way up, so the imagery is critical for the science.
DG: Two octopods at about two miles depth.
What we saw up till now was from the Pacific.
This is from the Atlantic. Even greater depth.
You can see this shrimp is harassing this poor little guy here, and he'll bat it away with his claw. Whack!
And the same thing's going on over here.
And what these shrimp are trying to do is actually harvest the bacteria from the backs of these animals.
And the crabs don't like it at all.
These long filaments that you see on the back of the crab are actually created by the product of that bacteria.
So, the bacteria grows hair on the crab.
On the back, you see this again.
The red dot is the laser light of the submarine Alvin to give us an idea about how far away we are from the vents.
Those are all shrimp.
You see the hot water over here, here and here, coming out.
They're clinging to a rock face and actually scraping bacteria off that rock face.
Here's a tiny, little vent that's come out of the side of that pillar.
Those pillars get up to several stories.
They don't need the sun at all.
BL: You see this white V-shaped mark on the back of the shrimp?
It's actually a light-sensing organ.
It's how they find the hydrothermal vents.
This is the first time we've ever tried this any place.
We're going to try to show you high definition from the Pacific.
We're moving up one of these pillars.
This one's several stories tall.
In it, you'll see that it's a habitat for a lot of different animals.
There's a funny kind of hot plate here, with vent water coming out of it.
So all of these are individual homes for worms.
Now here's a closer view of that community.
Here's crabs here, worms here.
There are smaller animals crawling around.
Here's pagoda structures.
I think this is the neatest-looking thing.
This stuff is toxic as hell, by the way.
You could never get a permit to dump this in the ocean, and it's coming out all from it.
It's unbelievable. It's basically sulfuric acid, and it's being just dumped out, at incredible rates.
And animals are thriving -- and we probably came from here.
That's probably where we evolved from.
BL: This bacteria that we've been talking about turns out to be the most simplest form of life found.
There are a number of groups that are proposing that life evolved at these vent sites.
DG: It works too well. You see there're some fish inside here as well.
There's a fish sitting here.
Here's a crab with his claw right at the end of that tube worm, waiting for that worm to stick his head out.
BL: The biologists right now cannot explain why these animals are so active.
The worms are growing inches per week!
DG: I already said that this site, from a human perspective, is toxic as hell.
Their plumbing system turns off, so the sites have to move.
Despite that, these animals grow back in about a year's time.
You're talking about biodensities and biodiversity, again, higher than the rainforest that just springs back to life.
Is it sensitive? Yes.
Is it fragile? No, it's not really very fragile.
I'll end up with saying one thing.
There's a story in the sea, in the waters of the sea, in the sediments and the rocks of the sea floor.
It's an incredible story.
What we see when we look back in time, in those sediments and rocks, is a record of Earth history.
Everything on this planet -- everything -- works by cycles and rhythms.
The continents move apart. They come back together.
Oceans come and go. Mountains come and go. Glaciers come and go.
El Nino comes and goes. It's not a disaster, it's rhythmic.
What we're learning now, it's almost like a symphony.
It's just like music -- it really is just like music.
It's absurd. It's just absurd.
So, what we've got to learn now is to find out where this planet's going at all these different scales and work with it.
Learn to manage it.
The concept of preservation is futile.
Conservation's tougher, but we can probably get there.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.
I'm here today to start a revolution.
Now before you get up in arms, or you break into song, or you pick a favorite color, I want to define what I mean by revolution.
By revolution, I mean a drastic and far-reaching change in the way we think and behave -- the way we think and the way we behave.
Now why, Steve, why do we need a revolution?
We need a revolution because things aren't working; they're just not working.
And that makes me really sad because I'm sick and tired of things not working.
You know, I'm sick and tired of us not living up to our potential.
I'm sick and tired of us being last.
And we are last place in so many things -- for example, social factors.
We're last place in Europe in innovation.
There we are right at the end, right at the bottom, last place as a culture that doesn't value innovation.
We're last place in health care, and that's important for a sense of well-being.
And there we are, not just last in the E.U., we're last in Europe, at the very bottom.
And worst of all, it just came out three weeks ago, many of you have seen it, The Economist.
We're the saddest place on Earth, relative to GDP per capita -- the saddest place on Earth.
That's social. Let's look at education.
Where do we rank three weeks ago in another report by the OECD?
Last in reading, math and science. Last.
Business: The lowest perception in the E.U.
that entrepreneurs provide benefits to society.
Why as a result, what happens?
The lowest percentage of entrepreneurs starting businesses.
And this is despite the fact that everybody knows that small business is the engine of economies.
We hire the most people; we create the most taxes.
So if our engine's broken, guess what?
Last in Europe GDP per capita.
Last.
So it's no surprise, guys, that 62 percent of Bulgarians are not optimistic about the future.
We're unhappy, we have bad education, and we have the worst businesses.
And these are facts, guys.
This isn't story tale; it's not make-believe.
It's not.
It's not a conspiracy I have got against Bulgaria. These are facts.
So I think it should be really, really clear that our system is broken.
The way we think, the way we behave, our operating system of behaving is broken.
We need a drastic change in the way we think and behave to transform Bulgaria for the better, for ourselves, for our friends, for our family and for our future.
How did this happen?
Let's be positive now. We're going to get positive. How did this happen?
I think we're last because -- and this is going to be drastic to some of you -- because we are handicapping ourselves.
We're holding ourselves back because we don't value play.
I said "play," all right.
In case some of you forgot what play is, this is what play looks like.
Babies play, kids play, adults play.
We don't value play.
In fact, we devalue play.
And we devalue it in three areas.
Let's go back to the same three areas.
Social: 45 years of what?
And instead, what do we value?
To be serious.
To be really, really serious.
It did.
Be serious.
I can't tell you how many times I've been scolded in the park for letting my kids play on the ground.
Heaven forbid they play in the dirt, the kal, or even worse, lokvi, water -- that will kill them.
We have a serious meme running through.
It's a social gene running through us.
It's a serious gene.
It's 45 years of it that's created what I call the "baba factor."
And here's how it works.
Step one: woman says, "I want to have a baby. Iskam baby."
Step two: we get the baby. Woohoo!
But then what happens in step three?
I want to go back to work because I need to further my career or I just want to go have coffees.
I'm going to give bebko to baba.
But we need to remember that baba's been infected by the serious meme for 45 years.
So what happens?
What happens then?
It's a crap system.
True story: I went looking for a school for my kid.
And we said, "Well what about play and recess?"
And they said, "Ha. There won't be a single moment in the schedule."
And we said, "He's five."
What a crime. What a crime.
But I'm sorry, the problems of today are not the problems of the Industrial Revolution.
We need adaptability, the ability to learn how to be creative and innovative.
We don't need mechanized workers.
But no, now our meme goes into work where we don't value play.
We create robotic workers that we treat like assets, to lever and just throw away.
What are qualities of a Bulgarian work?
Autocratic -- do what I say because I'm the chef.
I'm the boss and I know better than you.
Untrusting -- you're obviously a criminal, so I'm going to install cameras.
Controlling -- you're obviously an idiot, so I'm going to make a zillion little processes for you to follow so you don't step out of the box.
So they're restrictive -- don't use your mobile phone, don't use your laptop, don't search the Internet, don't be on I.M.
That's somehow unprofessional and bad.
And at the end of the day, it's unfulfilling because you're controlled, you're restricted, you're not valued and you're not having any fun.
In social, in education and in our business, don't value play.
And that's why we're last, because we don't value play.
And you can say, "That's ridiculous, Steve. What a dumb idea.
It can't be because of play.
Just play, that's a stupid thing."
We have the serious meme in us.
Well I'm going to say no.
Play: our brains are hardwired for play.
Evolution has selected, over millions and billions of years, for play in animals and in humans.
And you know what?
Evolution does a really, really good job of deselecting traits that aren't advantageous to us and selecting traits for competitive advantage.
Nature isn't stupid, and it selected for play.
Throughout the animal kingdom, for example: ants. Ants play.
Maybe you didn't know that.
But when they're playing, they're learning the social order and dynamics of things.
Kittens play. We all know kittens play.
But what you may not know is that kittens deprived of play are unable to interact socially.
They can still hunt, but they can't be social.
Bears play.
But what you may not know is that bears that play more survive longer.
It's not the bears that learn how to fish better.
It's the ones that play more.
And a final really interesting study -- it's been shown, a correlation between play and brain size.
The more you play, the bigger the brains there are.
Dolphins, pretty big brains, play a lot.
But who do you think with the biggest brains are the biggest players?
Yours truly: humans.
Kids play, we play -- of every nationality, of every race, of every color, of every religion.
It's a universal thing -- we play.
And it's not just kids, it's adults too.
Really cool term: neoteny -- the retention of play and juvenile traits in adults.
And who are the biggest neotenists?
Humans. We play sports.
We do it for fun, or as Olympians, or as professionals.
We play musical instruments.
We dance, we kiss, we sing, we just goof around.
We're designed by nature to play from birth to old age.
We're designed to do that continuously -- to play and play a lot and not stop playing.
It is a huge benefit.
Just like there's benefits to animals, there's benefits to humans.
For example, it's been shown to stimulate neural growth in the amygdala, in the area where it controls emotions.
It's been shown to promote pre-frontal cortex development where a lot of cognition is happening.
As a result, what happens?
We develop more emotional maturity if we play more.
We develop better decision-making ability if we play more.
These guys are facts.
It's not fiction, it's not story tales, it's not make-believe; it's cold, hard science.
These are the benefits to play.
It is a genetic birthright that we have, like walking or speaking or seeing.
And if we handicap ourselves with play, we handicap ourselves as if we would with any other birthright that we have.
We hold ourselves back.
Little exercise just for a second: close your eyes and try to imagine a world without play.
Imagine a world without theater, without the arts, without song, without dancing, without soccer, without football, without laughter.
What does this world look like?
It's pretty bleak.
It's pretty glum.
Now imagine your workplace.
Is it fun? Is it playful?
Or maybe the workplace of your friends -- here we're forward thinking.
Is it fun? Is it playful?
Or is it crap? Is it autocratic, controlling, restrictive and untrusting and unfulfilling?
We have this concept that the opposite of play is work.
We even feel guilty if we're seen playing at work.
He's going to think I'm not working hard."
But I have news for you: our thinking is backwards.
The opposite of play is not work.
The opposite of play is depression. It's depression.
In fact, play improves our work.
Just like there's benefits for humans and animals, there's benefits for play at work.
For example, it stimulates creativity.
It increases our openness to change.
It improves our ability to learn.
It provides a sense of purpose and mastery -- two key motivational things that increase productivity, through play.
So before you start thinking of play as just not serious, play doesn't mean frivolous.
You know, the professional athlete that loves skiing, he's serious about it, but he loves it.
He's having fun, he's in the groove, he's in the flow.
A doctor might be serious, but laughter's still a great medicine.
Our thinking is backwards.
We shouldn't be feeling guilty.
We should be celebrating play.
Quick example from the corporate world.
FedEx, easy motto: people, service, profit.
What happens? They give better service -- not worse, but better.
And what do great customers do, great-feeling customers?
They buy more of your service and they tell more of their friends, which leads to more profit.
People, service, profit.
Play increases productivity, not decreases.
And you're going to say, "Gee, that can work for FedEx out there in the United States, but it can't work in Bulgaria.
No way. We're different."
It does work in Bulgaria, you guys. Two reasons.
One, play is universal.
There's nothing weird about Bulgarians that we can't play, besides the serious meme that we have to kick out.
Two, I've tried it. I've tried at Sciant.
When I got there, we had zero happy customers.
Not one customer would refer us.
I asked them all.
We had marginal profit -- I did.
We had marginal profits, and we had unhappy stakeholders.
I don't care when you get in in the morning. I don't care when you leave.
I care that your customer and your team is happy and you're organized with that.
Why do I care if you get in at nine o'clock?
Basically promoting fun.
And you can say, "Well how do you know they're happy?"
Well we did win, every year that we entered, one of the rankings for best employer for small business.
Independent analysis from anonymous employees on their surveys.
It does, and it can, work in Bulgaria.
There's nothing holding us back, except our own mentality about play.
So some steps that we can take -- to finish up -- how to make this revolution through play.
First of all, you have to believe me.
If you don't believe me, well just go home and think about it some more or something.
Second of all, if you don't have the feeling of play in you, you need to rediscover play.
I don't care if it's mountain biking or reading a book or playing a game.
Rediscover that because you're the leaders, the innovation leaders, the thought leaders.
You're the ones that have to go back to the office or talk to your friends and ignite the fire of change in the play revolution.
You guys have to, and if you're not feeling it, your colleagues, your employees, aren't going to feel it.
You've got to go back and say, "Hey, I'm going to trust you."
Weird concept: I hired you; I should trust you.
I'm going to let you make decisions. I'm going to empower you, and I'm going to delegate to the lowest level, rather than the top.
I'm going to encourage constructive criticism.
I'm going to let you challenge authority.
Because it's by challenging the way things are always done is that we are able to break out of the rut that we're in and create innovative solutions to problems of today.
We're not always right as leaders.
We're going to eradicate fear.
Fear is the enemy of play.
And we're going to do things like eliminate restrictions.
You know what, let them use their mobile phone for personal calls -- heaven forbid.
Let them be on the Internet.
Let them be on instant messengers.
Let them take long lunches.
Lunch is like the recess for work.
Let them do it. Give them some freedom, and in general, let them play. Let them have fun at the workplace.
Is that all there was?"
Unacceptable. Nepriemliv.
So in summary, we need a drastic change in the way we think and behave, but we don't need a workers' revolution.
We don't need a workers' revolution.
What we need is a players' uprising.
What we need is a players' uprising.
What we need is a players' uprising.
Seriously, we need to band together.
Today is the start of the uprising.
But what you need to do is fan the flames of the revolution.
Thank you.
Radical openness is still a distant future in the field of school education.
We have such a hard time figuring out that learning is not a place but an activity.
Look at how the world looked in the 1960s, in terms of the proportion of people who had completed high school.
But in the 1970s, some countries caught up.
In the 1980s, the global expansion of the talent pool continued.
And the world didn't stop in the 1990s.
So in the '60s, the U.S. was first.
In the '90s, it was 13th, and not because standards had fallen, but because they had risen so much faster elsewhere.
Korea shows you what's possible in education.
Two generations ago, Korea had the standard of living of Afghanistan today, and was one of the lowest education performers.
Today, every young Korean finishes high school.
And that tells you that better degrees don't automatically translate into better skills and better jobs and better lives.
So with PISA, we try to change this by measuring the knowledge and skills of people directly.
And we took a very special angle to this.
Now, some people have criticized us for this.
And once hotly contested, our way of measuring outcomes has actually quickly become the standard.
In our latest assessment in 2009, we measured 74 school systems that together cover 87 percent of the economy.
This chart shows you the performance of countries.
In red, sort of below OECD average.
Yellow is so-so, and in green are the countries doing really well.
You can see Shanghai, Korea, Singapore in Asia; Finland in Europe; Canada in North America doing really well.
There's a world of difference in the way in which young people are prepared for today's economy.
But I want to introduce a second important dimension into this picture.
Educators like to talk about equity.
And we see that in some countries, the impact of social background on learning outcomes is very, very strong.
Opportunities are unequally distributed.
A lot of potential of young children is wasted.
We see in other countries that it matters much less into which social context you're born.
We all want to be there, in the upper right quadrant, where performance is strong and learning opportunities are equally distributed.
Nobody, and no country, can afford to be there, where performance is poor and there are large social disparities.
And then we can debate, you know, is it better to be there, where performance is strong at the price of large disparities?
Or do we want to focus on equity and accept mediocrity?
In fact, one of the most important lessons from this comparison is that you don't have to compromise equity to achieve excellence.
These countries have moved on from providing excellence for just some to providing excellence for all, a very important lesson.
And that also challenges the paradigms of many school systems that believe they are mainly there to sort people.
But let's step back for a moment and focus on the countries that actually started PISA, and I'm giving them a colored bubble now.
And I'm making the size of the bubble proportional to the amount of money that countries spent on students.
But that's not what you see.
What you see is that two countries with similar spending achieve very different results.
Let's look at this in greater detail.
The red dot shows you spending per student relative to a country's wealth.
And Korea also invests into long school days, which drives up costs further.
Last but not least, Koreans want their teachers not only to teach but also to develop.
They invest in professional development and collaboration and many other things.
All that costs money.
How can Korea afford all of this?
The answer is, students in Korea learn in large classes.
This is the blue bar which is driving costs down.
But, you know, parents and teachers and policymakers in Luxembourg all like small classes.
You know, it's very pleasant to walk into a small class.
So they have invested all their money into there, and the blue bar, class size, is driving costs up.
But even Luxembourg can spend its money only once, and the price for this is that teachers are not paid particularly well.
Students don't have long hours of learning.
And basically, teachers have little time to do anything else than teaching.
Let's go back to the year 2000.
Remember, that was the year before the iPod was invented.
This is how the world looked then in terms of PISA performance.
The first thing you can see is that the bubbles were a lot smaller, no?
We spent a lot less on education, about 35 percent less on education.
So you ask yourself, if education has become so much more expensive, has it become so much better?
And the bitter truth really is that, you know, not in many countries.
But there are some countries which have seen impressive improvements.
And remember, Germany, we used to be one of those countries that comes out very well when you just count people who have degrees.
Very disappointing results.
People were stunned by the results.
And then policymakers began to respond to this.
The federal government dramatically raised its investment in education.
A lot was done to increase the life chances of students with an immigrant background or from social disadvantage.
PISA has transformed that debate, and pushed early childhood education right at the center of public policy in Germany.
A lot of change.
And the good news is, nine years later, you can see improvements in quality and equity.
People have taken up the challenge, done something about it.
Or take Korea, at the other end of the spectrum.
They took up the challenge, and Korea was able to double the proportion of students achieving excellence in one decade in the field of reading.
And you can see other countries as well.
Portugal was able to consolidate its fragmented school system, raise quality and improve equity, and so did Hungary.
So what you can actually see, there's been a lot of change.
You know, Poland hasn't changed its culture.
It didn't change its economy. It didn't change the compositions of its population.
It didn't fire its teachers. It changed its education policies and practice. Very impressive.
And, of course, the question is, can what works in one context provide a model elsewhere?
Everybody agrees that education is important.
Everybody says that.
But the test of truth is, how do you weigh that priority against other priorities?
How do countries pay their teachers relative to other highly skilled workers?
Would you want your child to become a teacher rather than a lawyer?
How do the media talk about schools and teachers?
And you know what's interesting? You won't believe it, but there are countries in which the most attractive place to be is not the shopping center but the school.
Those things really exist.
But placing a high value on education is just part of the picture.
The other part is the belief that all children are capable of success.
You have some countries where students are segregated early in their ages.
You know, students are divided up, reflecting the belief that only some children can achieve world-class standards.
But usually that is linked to very strong social disparities.
When we asked students what counts for success in mathematics, students in North America would typically tell us, you know, it's all about talent.
If I'm not born as a genius in math, I'd better study something else.
In the past, different students were taught in similar ways.
High performers on PISA embrace diversity with differentiated pedagogical practices.
They realize that ordinary students have extraordinary talents, and they personalize learning opportunities.
High-performing systems also share clear and ambitious standards across the entire spectrum.
Every student knows what matters.
Every student knows what's required to be successful.
And nowhere does the quality of an education system exceed the quality of its teachers.
High-performing systems are very careful in how they recruit and select their teachers and how they train them.
They watch how they improve the performances of teachers in difficulties who are struggling, and how they structure teacher pay.
They provide an environment also in which teachers work together to frame good practice.
And they provide intelligent pathways for teachers to grow in their careers.
In bureaucratic school systems, teachers are often left alone in classrooms with a lot of prescription on what they should be teaching.
High-performing systems are very clear what good performance is.
They set very ambitious standards, but then they enable their teachers to figure out, what do I need to teach to my students today?
The past was about delivered wisdom in education.
Now the challenge is to enable user-generated wisdom.
